---
description: Creating immutable classes.
---

# 28. Immutability

### Immutable Classes

An old friend from CS1101S, immutability (and immutable classes) refer to things which cannot change. In practical terms, this means that every instance of an immutable class **cannot have any visible changes outside its abstraction barrier, i.e., every call of the instance's method must behave the same way**.

Recall the `Point` class, which has a `moveTo` method that updates the `x` and `y` coordinates of the point. We rewrite the `Point` class to make it immutable.

{% code lineNumbers="true" %}
```java
final class Point {
    private final double x;
    private final double y;
    
    public Point(double x, double y) {
        this.x = x;
        this.y = y;
    }
    
    public double getX() {
        return this.x;
    }
    
    public Point moveTo(double x, double y) {
        return new Point(x, y);
    }
    
    // Other method declarations
```
{% endcode %}

Observe that in our new implementation of the `moveTo` method, we create a new `Point` object isntead of updating our existing one. This means that every call of the `getX` method will return the same `x` value, and our `Point` is therefore immutable.

We also add the `final` keyword to disallow inheritance from our immutable class. To update our `Point object`, we will need to explicitly reassign it.

{% code lineNumbers="true" %}
```java
p1 = new Point(1, 1);
p1 = p1.moveTo(2, 2);
```
{% endcode %}

### Advantages of Immutability

Writing immutable classes has several benefits.

1. Ease of Understanding - code tracing is easier.
2. Enables Safe Sharing of Objects - we can now share instances of objects, reducing the need to create multiple copies of the object.
3. Enables Safe Sharing of Internals - accessing things is epic.
4. Enables Safe Concurrent Execution - concurrent code is hard to debug for mutable objects.

### Final vs. Immutable

Take note that declaring every field with the `final` keyword does not actually make a class immutable! Consider the following example that is a `final` class, but is mutable.

```java
final class Circle {
    private final Point c;
    private final double r;
    
    public Circle(Point c, double r) {
        this.c = c;
        this.r = r;
    }
    
    public Point getCenter() {
        return this.c;
    }
    
    public Circle moveTo(double x, double y) {
        return new Circle(c.moveTo(x, y), r);
    }
}
```

Althought everything in `Circle` is `final`, we can still move the center of the circle through changing the field `c` of the circle.

Take note that we also don't need a `final` keyword on our fields to make an immutable class. We only require the `final` keyword on the class to disallow inheritance.
