---
description: The beginning of the end.
---

# 37. Parallel Streams

### Parallel and Concurrent Programming

Every program we've seen thus far runs **sequentially**, meaning that there is only one instruction being processed at a time. We can write programs so that they run concurrently, by dividing the computation into subtasks called **threads**.

Multi-thread programs are useful in two ways:

1. It allows the programmer to separate unrelated tasks into threads and write each thread separately
2. It improves the utilization of the processor

While concurrency gives the illusion of multiple subtasks running simultaneously, parallel computing refers to the scenario where multiple subtasks are actually running at the same time - either because we have multiple processors available, or we have a single processor that is capable of running multiple instructions at the same time. All parallel programs are concurrent, but not all concurrent programs are parallel.

### Parallel Streams

In Java, we can use the `parallel()` method on streams to make it parallel. For example, the stream below is a sequential stream, and will print out the prime numbers in ascending order.

{% code lineNumbers="true" %}
```java
IntStream.range(2_030_000, 2_040_000)
    .filter(x -> isPrime(x))
    .forEach(System.out::println);
```
{% endcode %}

We now add the `parallel()` method, and the new stream will not produce the primes in ascending order.

{% code lineNumbers="true" %}
```java
IntStream.range(2_030_000, 2_040_000)
    .filter(x -> isPrime(x))
    .parallel()
    .forEach(System.out::println);
```
{% endcode %}

This is because `Stream` has broken down the numbers in the range into subsequences, and run `filter` and `forEach` on each subsequence in parallel too. In Java, `parallel()` is a lazy operation, and can be inserted anywhere after the data source and before the terminal operation. Another way to create a parallel stream is to use the method `parallelStream()` instead of `stream()`.

To ensure that the output of the parallel execution is correct, the stream operations must not interfere with the stream data, and should be stateless. Side effects should be kept to a minimum. Below is an example of interference, that is, stream operations modifying the stream.

{% code lineNumbers="true" %}
```java
List<String> list = new ArrayList<>(List.of("Luke", "Leia", "Han"));
list.stream()
    .peek(name -> {
         if (name.equals("Han")) {
           list.add("Chewie"); // they belong together
         }
      })
    .forEach(i -> {});
```
{% endcode %}

This block of code will cause a `ConcurrentModificationException` to be thrown.

A **stateful lambda** is one where the result depends on any state that might change during the execution of the stream. Therefore, parallelizing a stateful lambda is dangerous, and additional work needs to be done to make it feasible. Side effects are also dangerous for a similar reason.

Thankfully, there are three ways we can resolve this:

1. Use the `collect` method
2. Use a thread-safe data structure, such as the `CopyOnWriteArrayList` in `java.util.concurrent`
3. Use the `toList` method

Remark: We can actually run the `reduce` operation in parallel. However, there are several rules which the `identity`, `accumulator`, and `combiner` expressions must follow.

1. `combiner.apply(identity, i)` must be equal to `i`
2. `accumulator` and `combiner` must be associative - order of application does not matter
3. `combiner` and `accumulator` must be compatible - `combiner.apply(u, accumulator.apply(identity, t))` must equal to `accumulator.apply(u, t)`

### Performance of Parallel Streams

Take note that parallelizing a stream does not always improve the performance of the program. Creating threads to run a task incurs some overhead, and the overhead of creating too many threads might outweigh the benefits of parallelization.

### Ordered and Unordered Sources

Some stream sources, such as `iterate`, are ordered, while others such as `generate` are unordered. Parallelizing ordered streams may be more expensive, as extra effort is required to put the elements back in order after parallelization. Otherwise, we can use the `unordered` method to make parallel operations much more efficient if the final order does not matter.

{% code lineNumbers="true" %}
```java
Stream.iterate(0, i -> i + 7)
    .parallel()
    .unordered() // makes this faster!
    .limit(10_000_000)
    .filter(i -> i % 64 == 0)
    .forEachOrdered(i -> {});
```
{% endcode %}
