---
description: The normal implementation of infinite lists.
---

# 34. Streams in Java

### Java API

Throughout the course, we've built several of our own classes and interfaces, such as `Maybe`, `InfiniteList`, `Producer`, and `BooleanCondition`. Thankfully, Java actually has many of these inbuilt within the `java.util.function` package. The following table offers a comparison between Java's official ones and our ones.

| CS2030S                        | java.util.function           |
| ------------------------------ | ---------------------------- |
| `BooleanCondition<T>::test`    | `Predicate<T>::test`         |
| `Producer<T>::produce`         | `Supplier<T>::get`           |
| `Consumer<T>::consume`         | `Consumer<T>::accept`        |
| `Transformer<T, R>::transform` | `Function<T, R>::apply`      |
| `Transformer<T, T>::transform` | `UnaryOperator<T>::apply`    |
| `Combiner<S, T, R>::combine`   | `BiFunction<S, T, R>::apply` |

Our `Maybe<T>` class is also equivalent to Java's `java.util.Optional<T>`, and `InfiniteList<T>` is equivalent to `java.util.stream.Stream<T>`.

### Building a Stream

There are a handful of different ways in which we can build a stream.

* We can use the static factory method `of` (e.g.,  `Stream.of(1, 2)`).
* We can use the `generate` and `iterate` methods.
* We can convert arrays into a `Stream` using `Arrays::stream`.
* We can convert lists into a `Stream` using `List::stream`.

### Terminal and Intermediate Operations

A **terminal operation** is an operation on the stream that triggers evaluation of the stream, while an **intermediate operation** is an operation on a stream that returns another `Stream`.

When working with streams, we typically chain together a series of intermediate operations, such as `map` and `filter`, before ending the chain with a terminal operation.

Some intermediate operations are **stateful**, which means that they need to keep track of some states to operate. For example, the `sorted` and `distinct` operations require knowledge of the streams existing elements. These stateful operations should only be called on a finite stream.

### Limitations of Streams

One of the limitations of streams is they can only be operated on once. Attempting to iterate through a stream multiple times will only cause an `IllegalStateException` to be thrown. Therefore, we have to recreate the stream if we want to operate on it more than once.

{% code lineNumbers="true" %}
```java
Stream<Integer> s = Stream.of(1, 2, 3);
s.count();
s.count(); // throws error
```
{% endcode %}
